Well, hi, everybody. Thank you so much for joining us today. Happy Monday. Welcome to
the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup. I'm Rachel calling in from Boston today. I would
love to introduce our speaker, Merav Yuravlivker, co-founder and CEO of Data Society. Merav
will share with us some lessons in communicating the value of data science and bridging the
gap between teams.
Merav Yuravlivker, rstudio Well, thank you so much for joining. Let me
go ahead and share my screen here so you can all see what I'm seeing. This is meant to
be informal. As Rachel said, this is really, really fun for me to do these types of presentations
to be able to share the best practices that we've learned and then hear from you and hear
what else you're interested in. So don't be shy with questions. That's exactly why
I'm here. All right. So hopefully, you can all see my screen.
Looks good.
Looks good. Okay, great. So I like to call this presentation talk data to me because
I'm a nerd and I like puns. But really, the subtext here is communicating the value of
data. So I'll give you a bit of a history of myself and talk a little bit about what
I do. Before I do that, just wanted to let everyone know, presentation best practices.
So I like to have this at the beginning of each one, just as a gentle reminder. We want
this group to be interactive. You're all here to get value and to learn something new. So
just silence alerts from emails, cell phone slacks, text messages, and then participate
in discussions if you have some discussion questions. So I want this to be interactive.
This is really your time to be able to learn what you want to learn. And I want to make
sure that everybody can really walk away with something concrete. So as Rachel said, I'm
the CEO and co-founder of Data Society. Just to give you an idea of who we are as a company
that I helped start back in 2014. I'm actually did not start in the data science field. So
my background is in education. I started as a public school teacher in New York City,
teaching elementary special education for a number of years. And that's where my passion
is. It's really an education and empowering individuals and providing skills for them
to really supercharge what they're able to do and maximize their impact. Now that's really
what we do at Data Society, where we just help professionals use data better. We deliver
custom data science training programs to organizations. We also have a solution side of the house.
But over eight years, we've seen a really interesting evolution of what organizations
and professionals are looking for in data. And that's some of what we'll talk about today.
As best practices go with any teaching, for those who know education, we like to start
out with some objectives. What are you going to walk away with today? So an understanding
of some challenges that data professionals still face today that you might all face today.
Data trends, how they've shifted since 2018, 2017. We'll talk a little bit about that.
And then also some concrete steps that you can take to better communicate the value of
data, incorporate data-driven practices into your organization. And if there's something
here that's on this list that you're not seeing that you want to walk away with, let me know
in the chat, or you can also put that in Slido. I want to leave plenty of time for questions
and discussions at the end to make sure that, again, we're answering the questions that
you have. All right. And with that, there is a survey link here. Actually, let me see if
I can post that in the chat. This is the survey. This is what I like to call the frustrated
data scientist survey. If you are a data professional, you might face some frustration. And we want
to learn more about that, because that's some of what I'll be talking about today. So if
you have a few minutes, this is the only time I'll say, yeah, feel free to open another
window. If you want to fill out the survey, you're more than welcome to. We'll learn a
little bit more about that. All right. Okay. Let's turn back time. 2018, folks. What was
happening in 2018? Well, those who don't remember, Black Panther came out. That was a pretty
big hit. People were eating Tide Pods. Does anybody else remember that in the U.S.? This
might have been only an American thing, really, where there was something called the Tide
Pod Challenge, and it didn't end very well, but that's just what it was. Beyonce made
history in Coachella. This is also when Time's Up movement started. K-pop gained popularity
kind of all over the globe. Harry married Meghan. They were also still royals. There was a lot
of stuff happening in 2018, and it might feel that way now, given where we were at the moment.
That was the culture back then. Specific to data science, when we think about what did the field
look like back then, there were a few things that were happening at the time. The first one is that
there was more of a focus on some data pipelines starting to shift. APIs were becoming very
popular because people just heard that they were being used a lot. There were some advances in NLP
as well as deep learning. I believe the BERT model paper came out during that time.
There was also an increased demand on model interpretation. As data was growing, what I
would say is more people were realizing, oh, we don't really understand this. Just to give you
an idea, when we started in 2014, we would go to meetings with potential clients and partners,
and we would say, we teach R programming, for example. We got the question, no kidding,
we got the question, oh, why is it called R? Why didn't you call it S? Why didn't you call
it something else? We say Python programs. Oh, why is it called Python? Really, if we remember
all the way back in 2014, open source languages were not really well known outside of the data
community, statistician community. Fast forward to 2018, it became a lot more popular, but what we
found is that a lot of data professionals who worked with felt just really frustrated and stuck.
Typically, they were maybe the only person in the organization that knew how to use one of these
tools. They got a lot of nonsensical requests. They spent most of their time explaining data,
digging around in data, using Excel, you know, so there was a lot of that happening.
One of the things we wanted to find out is, okay, well, how can we better help people?
So, back in 2018, we were a pretty small company, pretty small community,
so I just posted something on Medium, said why we're giving away data science training materials
for free, because I built a survey that kind of asked some of these questions to understand what
the pain points were, and at the end of the survey, I'd be able to compile the results,
take some of those trends, and then be able to actually build a toolkit that could address some
of these pain points, so this is what the survey looked like. This is back in our old branding.
I left that survey up for a month-ish. We ended up getting almost 200 responses,
which for us was great at the time. Like I said, we're a small company. We're bootstrapped,
so we didn't have a VC or anything like that, and then I took that. We then posted the results
on Medium again, and then we were able to send out a toolkit that was really focused for
data professionals who felt frustrated, felt as though they were stuck, felt as though they
couldn't communicate insights correctly, and I have a really terrible joke that I'll tell you now,
which is if a data scientist finds a new insight but nobody around her understands it,
does it matter? Sadly, the answer is no. It's kind of a sad joke, but I appreciate it for
anybody who gave me the pity laugh while you were on mute, so thank you, and we know the value of,
everybody I think on this call understands the value of data, and so for us, we felt like it
was such a missed opportunity and a lot of lost resources to have such talented people
working on insights that at the end of the day would never be implemented, right,
and so the results that we found at the time, this was again, this was 2018,
leadership, non-data colleagues, they didn't really understand what data could do.
About 30% of data professionals' time was spent explaining results, so imagine in 40 hours,
in a 40-hour week, you're spending 10 to 15 hours of that literally just telling other people about
the work that you're doing, and we got a lot of magic comments in our open-ended section where a
lot of people said, yeah, my boss feels like what I do is magic. I just click a button, magic happens,
right, and so those were the types of trends that we were seeing, so based on that,
we developed a toolkit, and what does toolkit include? So, there are kind of three components
to it. The toolkit, we call it the data science communicator toolkit, and what it's meant to do
is to help facilitate a conversation between you, the data professional, and people around you who
might not understand data, so the first thing is marketing, right, so the toolkit comes with a
presentation. It comes with a script, and it also comes with sample email templates that you can
really just copy and paste and send out, putting in whatever you want, so the email template you
saw first, this is an example of the script, and then we have a slide deck as well that's based
off of the topics that we thought created the most frustration, so when we're thinking about
what does that presentation actually include, it was a lot of what data science can do and can't do,
talking about some ethics behind data science, focusing specifically on how difficult it is
to collect data, right, it's not all of a push of a button, to start facilitating the communication
and actually kind of building a common vocabulary, right, and that was the purpose behind it, so we
sent the toolkit out, got some great responses back. It still exists. It's still around, and you can
absolutely access it, and I think, Rachel, I think it's still on the Champion page, if I'm not
mistaken. Yes, it is. I will share that in the chat, too. I'll put in a plug for that if you just want
to take a look at what it was, and, you know, come 2022, and things are a little bit different,
right, so first of all, COVID happened. That was obviously a huge, huge shift. People are
working more remotely. There's a ton more data that exists, even from 2018 to today.
Alongside, there's really been, yeah, an increased focus of data everywhere, right, so if you have a
Fitbit, which I have as well, you have an Apple Watch. If you take bikes in the city or any type of
individual transportation, like the scooters, people can track movements within a city,
so you're all of a sudden seeing, again, such an influx of individual information on top of the
fact that, especially with the COVID pandemic, hey, data actually became, I mean, it was always,
there were some cases where it was life or death, but now there were a lot of cases where that's
true, right? If people, if health agencies weren't sharing information with each other,
we're really talking about lives that were at stake, so COVID plus increased data everywhere,
and then in the past few years, one of the shifts that we've seen is a focus for more companies and
more organizations to become data-driven, so what I would say is in our earlier years,
even through 2018 and 2019, training programs were focused on specific technical skills,
right, so just intro programming, machine learning techniques, neural networks, text mining,
but these were folks that already had essentially a background in data.
There was some Excel training, Power BI Tableau as well, but it wasn't as prominent.
In the past few years, we've seen a lot more of a demand for almost like a holistic data academy,
continuous learning, where now there's a mandate coming from senior leadership, and I don't know
if you've seen this where you are, where they're determined to become a data-literate organization,
so now it's not just the data scientists, but it's literally everybody within the organization
needs to have at least a basic understanding of what data does, how to use it, how to manage it,
right? We're seeing an increase in data governance, so if you work in any type
of a healthcare company or finance, you probably have already had a lot of these regulations in
place. If you don't, you're probably going to see a lot more of that, so obviously Europe passed GDPR,
and that was a really, really big shift in terms of how we think about data.
I know California also passed, I believe it's called the CPAA, similar to the GDPR, about
giving ownership back to individuals, so ownership of data back to individuals,
so in addition to these trends, another trend that we're seeing is, okay, well, now everybody needs
to understand data compliance, data ethics. You need to understand data governance, how
to manage that appropriately, and that requires a level of knowledge that some people don't have,
so on the back of all of these trends, we thought, okay, well, it's been about four years.
Let's check in with the people that we saw a little while ago, right?
What's happening now? What are they seeing in space? So, I'm going to caveat this. We released
the updated survey a few weeks ago, and we have about forty responses at my last check, so
the number of responses is a little bit lower, which is why I encourage everybody, if you have an
opportunity to take it, please do. That'll help us better understand where we are today,
but even so, we're finding some insights and some shifts that I wanted to share with you, so
these are the never-before-seen released results of the updated survey, and in addition to that,
we're going to be updating the toolkit accordingly to, again, really just help people communicate
better with the organization, so one of the biggest shifts that we saw from 2018 to today,
and we, by the way, over time, we've collected almost four hundred responses, so now we have
a sample size of four hundred versus about forty, so I just wanted to put that disclaimer out there.
We're all numbers people, but there was a shift in terms of what data professionals wish that
their management and leadership knew, which is it went from the top issue was what data science can
and cannot do, was that was what was identified in 2018. In 2020, it's actually flipped with a
second-place one, which is how data science can actually impact the company, and everything else
actually looks to be about the same. People are still feeling like nobody understands how much
time it takes, what different data science methods do, what different tools do, and to me, what this
says is, okay, since 2018, more people understand what data science is almost as a concept, if that
makes sense, but people still don't really understand the applications behind it
and how it can be used, so I thought that was a pretty interesting shift.
Beyond that, do you think your organization is using data effectively?
The same proportion of people said yes versus no. I was hoping that the proportion would be a little bit
more even, but we're looking at about thirty-five percent to sixty-five percent who said no, so it's
clear that, at least in terms of the data professional world, there's a lot of work left to
be done. People understand that data is important, but maybe they're still not leveraging it effectively.
Some other trends here, so some of the questions that we asked, what are some of
the biggest changes that other people have seen? An increased demand for data-related roles, so we
all know hiring has had some ups and downs, especially this year, but in general, data roles
still remain pretty high in demand, and now there's less of a lone data scientist,
like, in existence. Now, what we're seeing is that there's more people that are joining teams of data
professionals, so that's also a shift that we're seeing. Increased amounts of training, more
investment in data tools. We're the top three there, and then some of the biggest challenges,
and this is actually mirrors very much what we see as well, putting more people in the
challenges, and this is actually mirrors very much what we see as well, putting work into scalable
production, again, building those pipelines, so I know that MLOps has become a really popular topic.
We actually developed our own program for it last year because we saw the demand for it.
People can build algorithms, but now it's a question of how do you operationalize it?
How do you scale it? Getting access to the data that you need, again, that's a pretty tough
challenge for people. Still see that, and communicating data effectively with my colleagues,
so those were the top three challenges that people are still seeing. What I would say is
putting work into scalable production is less of something that we saw in 2018. It's definitely
something we're seeing a lot more today, and so I'm curious to hear about your feedback. I see
Lisa said she feels like, yes, this very much reflects what she knows, and Jeff is feeling a
little bit of that pain of the amount of time that it takes for data, so hopefully some of
these pain points and maybe some of these improvements are speaking to you.
So, some other trends that we're seeing, and I pull these quotes directly from our
survey. We do have some open-ended opportunities. Most people still think it's really easy to gather
data. I don't know why. This is something we try to focus on with a lot of the programs that we
run, which is it takes a lot of time and a lot of patience. Magic still appears, even in 2022,
so machine learning can't do magic, right? Again, we had a lot of responses saying there were
misperceptions, misconceptions about how data analytics can be performed, and then on the other
end of the spectrum, we have a situation where people have enough knowledge to know that it can
do stuff but don't understand the limitations, so data science means anything is possible
because look at Google. Yes, if we were to look at Google, if we were to look at those really
high-tech organizations, it seems like they can do anything and everything with data analytics
and machine learning, but it's easy to look at them and say they can do all of this.
We can too, and it's another thing to actually take a look and evaluate the infrastructure
that you have in place with an organization. How is your data stored? How is it being collected?
Who knows how to use it, right? So, there's a lot of people that said,
my manager thinks I can do anything with machine learning, and in theory,
that's kind of true, but it's also not if they don't have the relevant support behind them.
Interestingly enough, 30% of time on average is still spent explaining results. I would have hoped
that would be a little bit less, but overall, what we're seeing, at least in the responses
so far, and we're hoping to collect some more, is that people have a better idea of data,
but they don't really understand the nuances behind what's possible and what's not.
They're having difficulty understanding the applications, and that still seems to be a big
challenge for most people. With that, I have a discussion question for you, and I'm seeing some
people are already chiming in, so I'll give folks a few minutes in the chat.
How is this similar to what you're seeing? Alternatively, are there different pieces
that I'm missing here? Are there other pain points that you're seeing in your organization
that I haven't addressed? Feel free. You can put it in the chat if you're feeling brave.
You can always unmute yourself and provide a verbal comment, so I'll give folks a few minutes
to just type in and tell us what else are you seeing. Is this accurate for you?
Hi. Oh, there it goes. I was afraid I didn't let people unmute there. There we go.
I figured I'd say it rather than type because I typed so much during the day, but yeah, very much
feeling that. I started my analytics career 20 years ago and then worked in academia for a while
and then back in industry, and it just is shocking how little progress has been made
or maybe being in a different industry, how things are still so messy, and it's just shocking.
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you so much for that comment, and you have a really interesting
experience going from industry to academia and then back to industry, and so there's so much
advancement in the actual field of data, but then industry, it feels as though takes a longer time
to catch up as well, so I appreciate that perspective. Thanks, Lisa. I see, Laura,
you have your hand raised too. Do you want to jump in? Sure. I just wanted to expand. It seems a
couple of us have a similar issue is that our data team, we can provide places to start
inputting data from our fields. I work in a fundraising capacity, so we can give pipelines
for people to start recording various activities that they perform to see what leads to, say, a
donation, but so our leadership is saying, well, we've given you ways to measure those. Now, why
aren't you giving me the answer when maybe our field doesn't understand that they need to enter
the data, or they have their own shadow Excel system, and they aren't recording into our
pipeline, so our pipeline doesn't necessarily look correct, and so the data team are like,
we don't want to give you this answer that you've asked for because we don't trust this data at all,
but they'll say, well, give me the answer, and we'll worry about it later, so it's kind of the
partnership of we have to give the data back to our field members in some sort of analytic way
so that they can see the value of the data, but when the starting point is so poor,
we don't want to give them wrong information, so getting the non-data people in on the value of
data world when you're starting from maybe a less data mature situation has been one of our biggest
challenges in various places. Yeah, and Laura, I hear you 100%. We see a lot of that, and I see
that trend continuing for the foreseeable future because it takes a while for people to kind of
figure out to know what they don't know and then actually be willing to learn it and then apply it
in that situation, so it's hard when you're starting from a point where people might not
really understand what you're saying, but you have to be able to communicate results in some
form, so we've seen that across a lot, and that's a great point as well,
so thank you for that, and I'm seeing a lot of people being active in the chat, which is great.
A couple of other points to make. I think John made a good point where
explaining data has not always lost time, especially if you're doing it for clients.
Absolutely agree, and maybe I need to reframe my question a little bit because
I had in my mind explaining the work that you're doing to other colleagues,
which again is not necessarily time lost, but if there are ways to streamline that to make it
easier, but I completely hear what you're saying, and I do think that makes sense.
I'm also seeing a couple of folks saying, yeah, people want to hire more data scientists,
but what they really need is a data engineer, for example, and there's definitely a lot of
job postings that I've seen out there. I'm sure you have too, where somebody wants to hire a data
scientist that has experience with every tool under the sun plus a decade of experience in
analysis, and you can tell that they're not really sure what they're looking for,
so I think that's a really interesting point as well. People know that they need these folks
but don't really know how to describe the responsibilities, so I'm loving the chat that's
happening. Please keep it coming, and it's kind of nice to know that on some level we're all going
through the same thing, like nobody here is alone, so there's a lot of that as well.
Yeah, making the case for cultural change, completely agree. That's a really, really
important one, learning how to communicate with leaders and having leaders actually take the
responsibility of learning themselves about data. That's something that we found to be really
helpful. We have an executive-level workshop that we deliver that when executives take it,
they do feel more confident, so just being more confident about data and understanding the
strategy can help them be more open, so definitely, if you don't have a program like that
or if you think that your leaders are open to it, even doing something like a lunch and learn for
them can be really helpful. So, speaking of helpful, don't worry, Libby. Bring out all the
feels. Please feel free. This is a safe space for everyone, so feelings galore. I encourage everybody
to feel their feelings all the time. Yes, and one other thing Laura just added in there,
making a dashboard, and I saw this in some of the responses as well, that making a dashboard was the
same as doing data science. Dashboards are easy for people to understand, so that's the first
line of defense for people who want to quote-unquote do data, and if you're trying to get
your organization into a more data-driven mindset, that's a really useful tool, but it's also
important for them to understand the difference between having a dashboard, which can be
descriptive, versus something more predictive, for example, so let's talk about what we can do about
this. I'm sitting in the chat. I'm hearing from you. The pain points still exist, right, and so
what can we do to start to shift that, and in fact, excuse me, I just saw Lisa saying that
nerd lunch, hoping that it's a casual way to introduce data literacy concepts. I love that. I
think having these types of programs internally really speed up the adoption of data and the
understanding of data, and in fact, that's one of my pieces here, so when we're talking about
everybody on this call, you have pain points, and I recognize that you're all working really hard,
so this is not meant to be an added burden but rather an opportunity to think through what
options could work best for you, given where you are and given where your organization is.
First thing is to find a champion or be a champion, right? What we found to be most effective
is finding somebody in leadership. If you have a CTO, CIO, CDO, or anybody at the C-level who's
passionate about data, who has access to budget, who has a say, having somebody from leadership
saying, Hey, this is the direction we need to go in. Here are resources for you, is incredibly
powerful, especially with people who might be a little bit more resistant to learning about data.
Knowing that their leadership is expecting it can really help speed that process up.
Along those lines, if you're feeling up to it, offering some types of data trainings to develop
a common data vocabulary, empower staff. Again, the updated toolkit that we'll be releasing
probably within the next couple of weeks can be a great starting point for just a lunch and learn.
Help people around you understand what data can and cannot do. Help them understand
how they can contribute and make your life easier, because I think most people in general
don't, they want to be able to do this on their own, they just don't know how.
Giving people time and space to be innovative, so asking others, maybe other data professionals
around you, Hey, how are you using data? I think one of the most important things,
this is why I love kind of the RStudio community is sharing best practices,
especially internal to an organization, is such a powerful resource that generally isn't
leveraged to the fullest. Finding other people in your organization who can do that and starting to
share, you're going to really find a strong group of folks that will encourage data adoption and
will also potentially help you solve some challenges that you're seeing in space,
because they're familiar with the architecture, with the tools within an organization.
So then, and that's the last one, right?
Providing space and technology for people to innovate or bringing in outside resources to do
the same. And I'll just put in a plug, one of the things that I do, honestly, this is just something
that I do for free, is I do have a presentation that talks about what data science can and cannot
do, and the whole purpose of it is to facilitate this type of conversation.
Happy to chat with you if you think that's helpful for your organization. Easy for us to set up
a lunch and learn where I can just come in and do that, and hopefully start to support your
efforts and facilitate that communication. Being a role model, I'm sure most of you are
already doing this. But if you're not, or if you think there are ways to improve,
here are some suggestions as well. So, asking for metrics or analysis behind conclusions and
reports, or providing them, and showing that this is what the standard needs to look like.
Making sure that you're asking and addressing powerful questions, so
talking about what the implications are behind the insights, using tools and exercises to get
people out of the box, finding ways to connect with them that will help them better understand
what you're doing. Talk about what it means to make a decision based on data. I saw somebody
earlier said, we're still at a level where we're all trusting our gut. I saw several of those
comments also in even the updated survey responses. So, it's still happening. You can trust your gut
and then see if the data verifies it. I would say it's not always either or, because we don't
want to discount levels of experience, but I think we're at a point where those levels of experience
need to be supplemented by data. Then again, engaging creative thinking to drive innovation.
Providing a safe space, so a safe space like this one, a safe space like Nerd Lunch,
any type of lunch and learn that you have, even with other data professionals, just
what types of crazy ideas do you have? What would be interesting to explore?
Talk about what's possible, and one of the things that I always encourage any data professional to
do is find successful examples of data projects within your organization, so whether it's one
that you did, one that your colleague did. Leadership understands projects that are done
internally, so if you can show results, they will have much more understanding of what's possible,
and they're much more likely to support your efforts, so make sure to communicate
with those successes, and again, build that community practice. It can start from this
community. It can start from any other internal community that you have,
but that's also been a really key piece of success.
Oh, I jumped ahead a little bit. Giving recognition. Again, if there's a successful
project, shout to the rooftops about it. Have a lunch and learn about it. Is there a newsletter?
Maybe write a blurb about it. If you have a hackathon, demonstrate what were the top
three most successful outcomes from a hackathon. Shedding light on that not only encourages
leadership to look more into data, but it also encourages them to keep doing a good job. People
like to be recognized for the work that they're doing, and so being able to recognize that
is incredibly important, and then don't be afraid to make mistakes.
One of the things that we do internally is, if there's ever something that goes a little bit
differently than what we expected, whether it's on the solutions or the training side,
we do a debrief and just say, Okay, why did this happen? How do we prevent it moving forward?
There's no blame, and that helps people feel comfortable innovating. It also helps people
feel more comfortable asking for help when they need it. Alright, last discussion question,
and then I'll open it up to any type of questions that you have,
but my question to you is, we talked about some concrete things that you yourself can do.
What else have you seen be effective to build a data-driven environment or to help
other people understand what you're doing in a way that's supportive to you?
Awesome, so Lisa's saying, having upper management who support the effort.
Oh, Eugene, that's a really interesting point. Stop using the word data. Get specific.
I like that. What metrics are you looking at? What type of data, right?
And I see Leanne has her hand raised.
Yeah, thanks. I just wanted to share something, an initiative that we've been doing at the
Financial Times, where I work, and we as a wider data science, of which I run as a part of the
wider analytics organization, and we've had a big data democratization program, which is all around
data in the hands of people, and as part of that, we really invested in hiring a learning
and development individual who's a specialist in data, so she comes from a data analytics background,
but her education is in learning and development, and it's quite a unique,
niche role. Quite hard to source these types of people, but that's been fantastic because part of
her role is both in educating, a lot of what we've been talking about is that whole education of the
wider business community, but it's both a push and a pull in the sense of that she will both
educate kind of the wider business about the different types of analyses, descriptive,
prescriptive, predictive, and help them to learn to interrogate their own questioning about what
they're trying to find out from data, so that they have already kind of understand why they're asking
those questions, and what's actually relevant, right through to then actually helping us become
better data practitioners, I guess, as well as part of her responsibility, and it's a very like
interesting dynamic, and really intrigued as to how that will work, but it's been a really lovely
part of our kind of data democratization rollout is having that individual, so definitely a champion
for that. That's awesome, and can I ask Leanne, how often does that individual come to work with
you? What's the cadence there? So it's kind of, so they're 100% dedicated to analytics.
Unfortunately, this is where it gets into difficulty, that the business doesn't quite
still understand like they're like a lot less priority than like other roles in our organizations,
like for example, they're still a contractor. At the moment, the way that it works is that
whenever I've got, so for example, my two lead data scientists need a career plan
putting together for them and their teams, and so I've gone to her from like some career coaching
consultancy for them, so it's kind of in that scenario, it's very ad hoc, and then in the kind
of business faking scenario, it's very like strategic and very organized, so she's working
with various bits of the business, whether that be B2C, B2B, etc, to educate them around those concepts.
So in terms of our needs, it's ad hoc, but she recognizes that that's like 50% of her role,
so it's dependent on where kind of the demand is. That's great, and that's really helpful, and
I agree, like what I've seen and what I've had some requests to do is just be an outside voice
that comes in, somebody who's not prone to any internal kind of organizational behaviors,
just to speak and bring in my perspective to help support data professionals internally,
and sometimes you just need an external voice to come in and facilitate that conversation,
so I really appreciate that, and I think that's a really interesting way to do it as well,
so thank you for that. I'm seeing some other comments, so I'm just going to
go in here, you know, definitely using words that people can connect with,
like changing analytics to informatics,
Laura, the confusion of data requests and report analysis requests,
data is not the same thing as analysis. Yep, I hear you, and then talking, Libby mentioned,
you know, having a manager director who's willing to say no to things that don't make sense for the
team to work on, who protects their time. I agree, if you have a manager who's supportive, even if
they're not necessarily technical, but they understand what you're doing, that does make
a huge difference as well, because then you have an advocate in your corner that can also
bring the work that you're doing to the forefront, so I love all of these chats.
With that, that's the end of my formal presentation. I'll just leave this here.
This is my email. It's just marav.datasociety.com. I'm not burdening people with having to spell my
last name, but if you want to chat, if anything that I said resonated with you, or if you're
interested in doing a Lunch and Learn for your own organization, just let me know. This is what
I love doing. Like I said, my background's in education, so I enjoy sharing best practices,
sharing the knowledge that we've acquired over the past eight years as we've been working on this,
and really my main goal is to just support you in the work that you're doing, right, and make sure
that you have an environment around you that understands the value of what you bring to the
table. Let's do questions. Let's do any and all questions. Perfect. Thank you. There actually
aren't that many questions on Slido, because I see that a lot of people are putting comments
into the chat too, which I absolutely love, but one of the questions that was on Slido was,
how did you make the transition from special education teacher into data?
Yeah, that's a great question, so I'll tell you that it was a lot of serendipity.
I was in the classroom for a number of years, and I decided that I wanted to be able to have
an impact on a larger scale, so I then spent the next several years working at different
educational institutions like Kaplan, like the International Back-A-Way organization,
just really learning everything there is to know about education, training, and assessments,
and honestly, I had a mutual friend who was having trouble
finding out how to learn about data and how to learn. Specifically, actually, it was our
programming. He was an analyst on Wall Street who spent most of his time in Excel, and a friend of
his showed him how he could automate literally three weeks of work into an afternoon,
so he saw the value of that, and then when I was in my career, I also was using some data-driven
methods, but I couldn't find any resources that were specific to me as a professional where I
could just pick it up quickly, so we had a conversation and thought, well, if we can't
find what we need, let's build it, so it was myself and then two other co-founders, and
I said that the best thing that happens is that we still have a company and we build something
cool, and the worst thing that happens is that I learn a lot, and I did quit my job nine months
into it, and I said, well, I can always go find another job, and so along the way, I learned data
science, and I found it to be really empowering. I've never programmed before, and to understand
how it works, to understand how it can be impactful for folks, and then building something was really
fun for me, so I just love solving challenges, and this was definitely a lot of challenges to solve.
That's great. I don't think I see other side of the question, so I do want to open it up
to a broader discussion, and I can stop the recording, but I had one question, too.
I was curious, have you ever been in a position where you're not able to make the case to
leadership, or they're pushing back on you, and what do you do in that situation?
We do get a lot of pushback. Interestingly enough, what I would say is it's not always
talked to your leadership. A lot of times, it's management folks that have been doing
this for a while. You don't really see a need to change. There are a few points that I bring up
that I think are particularly effective. The first one is it's not something, let's say, that we're
forcing you to do tomorrow. We're not going to shift everything that you're doing. We're not
saying that what you're doing is wrong. What we're doing is showing you a different set of
tools and a different set of skills that might make your life easier, so by alleviating the
type of pressure of being forced to implement this, you're giving people room to explore and
understand for themselves why it's important, and sometimes it might not be. If there's a system
that works well within an organization, you don't need more out of it. It's fine. I'm not going to
force somebody to implement something in R if it's working just fine in Excel, so it's important
to have that mindset. I think the second point is, and again, it depends on the level that you're
speaking to. It will be really, really hard to stay competitive without these skills, just period.
There are organizations that are becoming really data-driven. There are organizations that are
leveraging their data very, very effectively, and that translates to increased profits, increased
revenue, increased efficiency, more satisfaction, increased retention of employees, and guess what?
If you're competing against that organization in five years and you don't have that same level of
skills, you're going to be feeling it, and so bringing in an element of, hey, here are what
the best practitioners are doing in your industry, and so if you're not driving towards that,
just be aware. It's going to be harder to stay competitive. It really is a business necessity,
and then the third one is finding any type of successful project or any type of
use case that will speak to that audience, so whenever I give my presentations, I like to
pull from different use cases in an industry where people can relate to, and I find that
that really helps with the light bulb moment because they start to understand how they could
be doing something similar, so those are three points that I would recommend. It doesn't always
work. It really does depend where the organization is, their budget. If somebody's
invested like 10 million dollars in a tool, they're going to want to use that tool
whether it's helpful or not, so there are some things that are harder to get around.
Definitely. Thank you, and I want to stay true to what I said where I'll stop the recording
so we all can jump in the conversation too, but on that point of finding different industry
examples, I wanted to say this in the recording. I did share the Champion site, rstudio.com
slash champion, which has a ton of different industry examples grouped together, so it pulls
together like webinars and meetups and blog posts and just lots of people talking about the ways
they're using data science, so that I share that in the chat too, but I will stop the recording
here so we can all can just like jump in and chat with each other, but to anybody watching
the recording, thank you. Thanks, Mirab.